en/reference/introduction.rst, before:

.. index::
   single: Introduction

Introduction
============

The Doctrine Migrations offer additional functionality on top of the database
abstraction layer (DBAL) for versioning your database schema and easily deploying
changes to it. It is a very easy to use and powerful tool.

In order to use migrations you need to do some setup first.

Installation
------------

There are two ways to use the Doctrine Migrations project. Either as a supplement
to your already existing Doctrine DBAL (+ ORM) setup or as a standalone "PHP Binary"
(also known as PHAR).

Use as Supplement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To use the Migrations as supplement you have to get the sources from the GitHub
repository, either by downloading them, checking them out as SVN external or as Git Submodule.

Then you have to setup the class loader to load the classes for the `Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations`
namespace in your project:

.. code-block:: php

    require_once '/path/to/migrations/lib/vendor/doctrine-common/Doctrine/Common/ClassLoader';

    use Doctrine\Common\ClassLoader;

    $classLoader = new ClassLoader('Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations', '/path/to/migrations/lib');
    $classLoader->register();

Now the above autoloader is able to load a class like the following:

.. code-block:: bash

    /path/to/migrations/lib/Doctrine/DBAL/Migrations/Migrations/Migration.php

Register Console Commands
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that we have setup the autoloaders we are ready to add the migration console
commands to our `Doctrine Command Line Interface <http://doctrine-orm.readthedocs.org/en/latest/reference/tools.html#adding-own-commands>`_:

.. code-block:: php

    // ...

    $cli->addCommands(array(
        // ...

        // Migrations Commands
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\DiffCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\ExecuteCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\GenerateCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\MigrateCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\StatusCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\VersionCommand()
    ));

Additionally you have to make sure the 'db' and 'dialog' Helpers are added to your Symfony
Console HelperSet.

.. code-block:: php

    $db = \Doctrine\DBAL\DriverManager::getConnection($params);
    // or
    $em = \Doctrine\ORM\EntityManager::create($params);
    $db = $em->getConnection();

    $helperSet = new \Symfony\Component\Console\Helper\HelperSet(array(
        'db' => new \Doctrine\DBAL\Tools\Console\Helper\ConnectionHelper($db),
        'dialog' => new \Symfony\Component\Console\Helper\DialogHelper(),
    ));

You will see that you have a few new commands when you execute the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ./doctrine list migrations
    Doctrine Command Line Interface version 2.0.0BETA3-DEV

    Usage:
      [options] command [arguments]

    Options:
      --help           -h Display this help message.
      --quiet          -q Do not output any message.
      --verbose        -v Increase verbosity of messages.
      --version        -V Display this program version.
      --color          -c Force ANSI color output.
      --no-interaction -n Do not ask any interactive question.

    Available commands for the "migrations" namespace:
      :diff      Generate a migration by comparing your current database to your mapping information.
      :execute   Execute a single migration version up or down manually.
      :generate  Generate a blank migration class.
      :migrate   Execute a migration to a specified version or the latest available version.
      :status    View the status of a set of migrations.
      :version   Manually add and delete migration versions from the version table.

PHP Binary / PHAR
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can download the Migrations PHP Binary, which is a standalone PHAR package
file with all the required dependencies. You can drop that single file onto any server
and start using the Doctrine Migrations.

To register a system command for the migrations you can create a simple batch
script, for example on a \*nix Environment creating a `/usr/local/bin/doctrine-migrations`:

.. code-block:: bash

    #!/bin/sh
    php /path/to/doctrine-migrations.phar "$@"

You could now go and use the migrations like:

.. code-block:: bash

    [shell]
    myshell> doctrine-migrations

Because the PHAR file is standalone it does not rely on the Symfony Console 'db' Helper,
but you have to pass a `--db-configuration` parameter that points to a PHP file
which returns the parameters for `Doctrine\DBAL\DriverManager::getConnection($dbParams)`.
If you don't specify this option Doctrine Migrations will look for a `migrations-db.php`
file returning that parameters in your current directory and only throw an error if
that is not found.

Configuration
-------------

The last thing you need to do is to configure your migrations. You can do so
by using the *--configuration* option to manually specify the path
to a configuration file. If you don't specify any configuration file the tasks will
look for a file named *migrations.xml* or *migrations.yml* at the root of
your command line. For the upcoming examples you can use a *migrations.xml*
file like the following:

.. code-block:: xml

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <doctrine-migrations xmlns="http://doctrine-project.org/schemas/migrations/configuration"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="http://doctrine-project.org/schemas/migrations/configuration
                        http://doctrine-project.org/schemas/migrations/configuration.xsd">

        <name>Doctrine Sandbox Migrations</name>

        <migrations-namespace>DoctrineMigrations</migrations-namespace>

        <table name="doctrine_migration_versions" />

        <migrations-directory>/path/to/migrations/classes/DoctrineMigrations</migrations-directory>

    </doctrine-migrations>

Of course you could do the same thing with a *configuration.yml* file:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: Doctrine Sandbox Migrations
    migrations_namespace: DoctrineMigrations
    table_name: doctrine_migration_versions
    migrations_directory: /path/to/migrations/classes/DoctrineMigrations

And if you want to specify each migration manually in YAML you can:

.. code-block:: yaml

    table_name: doctrine_migration_versions
    migrations_directory: /path/to/migrations/classes/DoctrineMigrations
    migrations:
      migration1:
        version: 20100704000000
        class: DoctrineMigrations\NewMigration

If you specify your own migration classes (like `DoctrineMigrations\NewMigration` in the previous
example) you will need an autoloader unless all those classes begin with the prefix Version*,
for example path/to/migrations/classes/VersionNewMigration.php.

Commit message:

Document How the Migrations Tool Finds Migration Files
And how the version number works.

Closes #13

en/reference/introduction.rst, after:

.. index::
   single: Introduction

Introduction
============

The Doctrine Migrations offer additional functionality on top of the database
abstraction layer (DBAL) for versioning your database schema and easily deploying
changes to it. It is a very easy to use and powerful tool.

In order to use migrations you need to do some setup first.

Installation
------------

There are two ways to use the Doctrine Migrations project. Either as a supplement
to your already existing Doctrine DBAL (+ ORM) setup or as a standalone "PHP Binary"
(also known as PHAR).

Use as Supplement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To use the Migrations as supplement you have to get the sources from the GitHub
repository, either by downloading them, checking them out as SVN external or as Git Submodule.

Then you have to setup the class loader to load the classes for the `Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations`
namespace in your project:

.. code-block:: php

    require_once '/path/to/migrations/lib/vendor/doctrine-common/Doctrine/Common/ClassLoader';

    use Doctrine\Common\ClassLoader;

    $classLoader = new ClassLoader('Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations', '/path/to/migrations/lib');
    $classLoader->register();

Now the above autoloader is able to load a class like the following:

.. code-block:: bash

    /path/to/migrations/lib/Doctrine/DBAL/Migrations/Migrations/Migration.php

Register Console Commands
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now that we have setup the autoloaders we are ready to add the migration console
commands to our `Doctrine Command Line Interface <http://doctrine-orm.readthedocs.org/en/latest/reference/tools.html#adding-own-commands>`_:

.. code-block:: php

    // ...

    $cli->addCommands(array(
        // ...

        // Migrations Commands
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\DiffCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\ExecuteCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\GenerateCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\MigrateCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\StatusCommand(),
        new \Doctrine\DBAL\Migrations\Tools\Console\Command\VersionCommand()
    ));

Additionally you have to make sure the 'db' and 'dialog' Helpers are added to your Symfony
Console HelperSet.

.. code-block:: php

    $db = \Doctrine\DBAL\DriverManager::getConnection($params);
    // or
    $em = \Doctrine\ORM\EntityManager::create($params);
    $db = $em->getConnection();

    $helperSet = new \Symfony\Component\Console\Helper\HelperSet(array(
        'db' => new \Doctrine\DBAL\Tools\Console\Helper\ConnectionHelper($db),
        'dialog' => new \Symfony\Component\Console\Helper\DialogHelper(),
    ));

You will see that you have a few new commands when you execute the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ./doctrine list migrations
    Doctrine Command Line Interface version 2.0.0BETA3-DEV

    Usage:
      [options] command [arguments]

    Options:
      --help           -h Display this help message.
      --quiet          -q Do not output any message.
      --verbose        -v Increase verbosity of messages.
      --version        -V Display this program version.
      --color          -c Force ANSI color output.
      --no-interaction -n Do not ask any interactive question.

    Available commands for the "migrations" namespace:
      :diff      Generate a migration by comparing your current database to your mapping information.
      :execute   Execute a single migration version up or down manually.
      :generate  Generate a blank migration class.
      :migrate   Execute a migration to a specified version or the latest available version.
      :status    View the status of a set of migrations.
      :version   Manually add and delete migration versions from the version table.

PHP Binary / PHAR
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can download the Migrations PHP Binary, which is a standalone PHAR package
file with all the required dependencies. You can drop that single file onto any server
and start using the Doctrine Migrations.

To register a system command for the migrations you can create a simple batch
script, for example on a \*nix Environment creating a `/usr/local/bin/doctrine-migrations`:

.. code-block:: bash

    #!/bin/sh
    php /path/to/doctrine-migrations.phar "$@"

You could now go and use the migrations like:

.. code-block:: bash

    [shell]
    myshell> doctrine-migrations

Because the PHAR file is standalone it does not rely on the Symfony Console 'db' Helper,
but you have to pass a `--db-configuration` parameter that points to a PHP file
which returns the parameters for `Doctrine\DBAL\DriverManager::getConnection($dbParams)`.
If you don't specify this option Doctrine Migrations will look for a `migrations-db.php`
file returning that parameters in your current directory and only throw an error if
that is not found.

Configuration
-------------

The last thing you need to do is to configure your migrations. You can do so
by using the *--configuration* option to manually specify the path
to a configuration file. If you don't specify any configuration file the tasks will
look for a file named *migrations.xml* or *migrations.yml* at the root of
your command line. For the upcoming examples you can use a *migrations.xml*
file like the following:

.. code-block:: xml

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <doctrine-migrations xmlns="http://doctrine-project.org/schemas/migrations/configuration"
          xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
          xsi:schemaLocation="http://doctrine-project.org/schemas/migrations/configuration
                        http://doctrine-project.org/schemas/migrations/configuration.xsd">

        <name>Doctrine Sandbox Migrations</name>

        <migrations-namespace>DoctrineMigrations</migrations-namespace>

        <table name="doctrine_migration_versions" />

        <migrations-directory>/path/to/migrations/classes/DoctrineMigrations</migrations-directory>

    </doctrine-migrations>

Of course you could do the same thing with a *configuration.yml* file:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: Doctrine Sandbox Migrations
    migrations_namespace: DoctrineMigrations
    table_name: doctrine_migration_versions
    migrations_directory: /path/to/migrations/classes/DoctrineMigrations

With the above example, the migrations tool will search the ``migrations_directory``
recursively for files that begin with ``Version`` followed one to 255 characters
and a ``.php`` suffix. ``Version.{1,255}\.php`` is the regular expression that's
used.

Everything after ``Version`` will be treated as the actual version in
the database. Take the file name ``VersionSomeVersion.php``, ``SomeVersion`` would
be the version *number* stored in the migrations database table. Since versions
are ordered, doctrine :doc:`generates </reference/generating_migrations>` version
numbers with a date time like ``Version20150505120000.php``. This ensures that
the migrations are executed in the correct order.

While you *can* use custom filenames, it's probably a good idea to the Doctrine
:doc:`generate migration files </reference/generating_migrations>` for you.


And if you want to specify each migration manually in YAML you can:

.. code-block:: yaml

    table_name: doctrine_migration_versions
    migrations_directory: /path/to/migrations/classes/DoctrineMigrations
    migrations:
      migration1:
        version: 20100704000000
        class: DoctrineMigrations\NewMigration

If you specify your own migration classes (like `DoctrineMigrations\NewMigration` in the previous
example) you will need an autoloader unless all those classes begin with the prefix Version*,
for example path/to/migrations/classes/VersionNewMigration.php.
